Running head: REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                      1




                               Reopening Openness to Experience:

                A Network Analysis of Four Openness to Experience Inventories



                 Alexander P. Christensen, Katherine N. Cotter, & Paul J. Silvia

                           University of North Carolina at Greensboro




                                           Author Note

       Alexander P. Christensen, Katherine N. Cotter, and Paul J. Silvia, Department of

Psychology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro

       P.J.S. was supported by grant RFP-15-12 from the Imagination Institute

(www.imagination-institute.org), funded by the John Templeton Foundation. The opinions

expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of

the Imagination Institute or the John Templeton Foundation.

       Acknowledgements: The authors did not preregister the study prior to data collection and

analysis. All data, analytic methods, and study materials are available on the Open Science

Framework for reproduction and replication purposes: osf.io/954a7/.

       Correspondence should be addressed to Alexander P. Christensen at Department of

Psychology, P. O. Box 26170, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC,

27502-6170, USA; apchrist@uncg.edu.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     2


                                             Abstract

Openness to Experience is a complex trait whose taxonomic structure has been widely debated.

Previous research has provided greater clarity of its lower-order structure by synthesizing facets

across several scales related to Openness to Experience. In the present study, we take a finer-

grained approach by investigating the item-level relations of four Openness to Experience

inventories (Big Five Aspects Scale, HEXACO-100, NEO-PI-3, and Woo et al.’s Openness to

Experience inventory), using a network science approach, which allowed items to form an

emergent taxonomy of facets and aspects. Our results (N = 802) identified 10 distinct facets

(Variety-Seeking, Aesthetic Appreciation, Intellectual Curiosity, Diversity, Openness to

Emotions, Fantasy, Imaginative, Self-Assessed Intelligence, Intellectual Interests, and Non-

Traditionalism) that largely replicate previous findings as well as 3 higher-order aspects: two that

are commonly found in the literature (Intellect and Experiencing; i.e., Openness), and one novel

aspect (Open-Mindedness). In addition, we demonstrate that each Openness to Experience

inventory offers a unique conceptualization of the trait, and that some inventories provide

broader coverage of the network space than others. Our findings establish a broader consensus of

Openness to Experience at the aspect- and facet-level, which has important implications for

researchers and the Openness to Experience inventories they use.

       Keywords: openness to experience, network analysis, taxonomy, facets, aspects
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                      3


                               Reopening Openness to Experience:

                A Network Analysis of Four Openness to Experience Inventories

       Openness to Experience is a broad and complex trait that has gone by many names over

the years, such as Openness to Experience, Intellect, Culture, Imagination, and Creativity (Fiske,

1949; Goldberg, 1981; Johnson, 1994; Norman, 1963; Saucier, 1992). Given the trait’s breadth

and complexity, researchers have identified two aspects of Openness to Experience: Openness to

Experience (for clarity, hereafter referred to as Experiencing, following Connelly et al., 2014b)

from the questionnaire tradition (Costa & McCrae, 1992), and Intellect from the lexical tradition

(Goldberg, 1981). The Experiencing aspect is characterized by an appreciation for aesthetics,

openness to emotions and sensations, absorption in fantasy, and engagement with perceptual and

sensory information (DeYoung et al., 2012). The Intellect aspect is characterized by

intellectualism, enjoyment of philosophy, curiosity, and engagement with abstract and semantic

information (DeYoung et al., 2012).

       Beneath the Experiencing and Intellect aspects, however, are many lower-order facets of

Openness to Experience. The measurement of these facets has been inconsistent, with some

facets being measured in some inventories but not in others. As a result, this has led to variation

in the coverage and conceptualization of the Openness to Experience construct. Despite research

examining the content and number of facets (Connelly et al., 2014b; Woo et al., 2014), there has

yet to be an empirical investigation into how the items of different inventories converge (or

diverge) on the coverage and content of lower-order facets.

       Therefore, in the present research, we sought to clarify how four commonly used

Openness to Experience inventories conceptualize the construct. In addition, we wanted to

clarify the number and content of the lower-order facets across these inventories. To do so, we
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                  4


applied a computational network science approach to construct a network using the items from

these four inventories. From this network, we used a community detection algorithm to identify

communities (i.e., facets) in the network. These network-identified facets were then used to

examine the conceptual coverage of each inventory—whether items of the inventory were

represented in many or a few of the network-identified facets.

                              Openness to Experience Taxonomy

       Past debates about how the global Openness to Experience trait should be defined has

subsided—traditional factor analysis approaches have identified both Experiencing and Intellect

as aspects of the global trait (DeYoung, Quilty, & Peterson, 2007; Woo et al., 2014).

Experiencing and Intellect are separate but related aspects of Openness to Experience, with

differential relations to affective, behavioral, and cognitive outcomes (DeYoung et al., 2012,

2014; Barford & Smillie, 2016). For example, Experiencing is positively related to creative

achievement in the arts (Kaufman et al., 2016), implicit learning (Kaufman et al., 2010), and

feeling mixed emotions (Barford & Smillie, 2016) while Intellect is positively related to creative

achievement in the sciences (Kaufman et al., 2016), working memory (DeYoung et al., 2009),

and fluid intelligence (DeYoung et al., 2012). As a result, these aspects have been generally

agreed upon.

       Beneath the Experiencing and Intellect aspects, however, the lower-order facet structure

of Openness to Experience becomes less clear—depending upon which inventory is used, the

number of facets included can range from four to nine (Connelly et al., 2014a). There appears to

be some level of agreement on the importance of some facets (e.g., aestheticism, intellectualism)

because they are featured in many inventories. Many facets, however, are unique to only one or

two inventories (e.g., feelings, actions, curiosity). Additionally, some inventories seem to
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     5


provide good coverage of the facets in one aspect but have limited coverage of facets in the

other. For instance, in Woo and colleagues’ (2014) factor analysis of seven Openness to

Experience inventories, facets of the NEO-PI-R loaded onto the Experiencing aspect well but

had relatively low loadings for the Intellect aspect. Thus, although several Openness to

Experience inventories exist, it appears that they vary substantially in their coverage of the trait’s

conceptual space.

       The special section in the Journal of Personality Assessment sought to reach a broader

consensus of this lower-order taxonomy (Connelly et al., 2014a). Connelly and colleagues

(2014b) undertook the most comprehensive theoretical evaluation of Openness to Experience’s

lower-order facets to date by theoretically sorting and meta-analyzing 85 Openness to

Experience-related scales. They identified eleven facets that were theoretically and empirically

related to Openness to Experience: Aestheticism, Autonomy, Fantasy, Innovation, Introspection,

Nontraditional, Openness to Emotions, Openness to Sensations, Thrill-Seeking, Tolerance, and

Variety-Seeking. Only four of these facets, however, were considered pure (i.e., not related to

any other personality trait): Aestheticism, Openness to Sensations, Nontraditional, and

Introspection. Based on Connelly et al.’s sort, these pure facets were placed within the

Experiencing (Aestheticism and Openness to Sensations) and Intellect (Nontraditional and

Introspection) aspects. The other seven facets aligned with Openness to Experience and other

personality traits, so they were labeled as trait compounds. For example, Fantasy was positively

associated with Openness to Experience and negatively with Conscientiousness while

Innovation, Openness to Emotions, Thrill-Seeking, and Variety-Seeking were positively

associated with Openness to Experience and Extraversion. In sum, their extensive analysis of

Openness to Experience-related scales provides a general framework for defining which facets
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                       6


are central to the construct.

        In the same special section, Woo and colleagues (2014) empirically evaluated Openness

to Experience’s lower-order structure by factor analyzing a multitude of Openness-related scales

and assembling a comprehensive inventory. Prior to inventory construction, Woo et al. (2014)

synthesized several taxonomic approaches to inventory development—questionnaire, lexical, and

subject matter experts—to systematically organize their measurement model of Openness to

Experience. They used an exploratory factor analysis on the existing facets of 36 Openness-

related scales to uncover two aspects and six facets (Table 1). Subject matter experts reviewed

the content (i.e., original facets and their items) of the factor analysis identified facets to generate

conceptual definitions for these six facets. From these conceptual definitions, a shortened

inventory was developed that produced a 54-item Openness to Experience inventory, which was

then examined in cross-cultural samples (Woo et al., 2014). In drawing from other inventories,

Woo et al. began to establish a more comprehensive lower-order facet structure of Openness to

Experience.

        Connelly et al.’s and Woo et al.’s works are the most extensive evaluations of Openness

to Experience’s lower-order taxonomy to date. Undoubtedly, the strength of their assessments

was the sheer number of facets that were investigated and synthesized. One limitation of this

approach, however, is that the theoretical interpretations of each inventory’s facets were taken at

face value. For example, Connelly and colleagues (2014b) sorted the theoretical definitions of

each facet into a conceptual category. Similarly, Woo et al. (2014) used facets, rather than items,

in their factor analyses and subject matter experts used facet descriptions to select items rather

than letting the items develop the facets themselves. In this way, their assessments maintained

the assumption that the items in each facet unequivocally represented their respective facet. This
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    7


assumption is practical because facets are designed and validated based on high internal

consistency; however, the assumption ignores the underlying covariance between items from

other facets that may form new, alternative facets. Thus, by examining the facet structure at the

facet-level, the rich item-level relationships across all the inventories were obscured.

       To examine the item-level relations between different Openness to Experience

inventories, we used the network approach, which allows items to covary with one another and

emergent facet categorizations to arise. The network approach can be similar to an exploratory

factor analysis; however, it provides a graphical representation that allows a visual mapping of

how items relate to one another. Therefore, the network approach can offer cleaner distinctions

of item classification as opposed to deciphering component loadings, which often have

complicated interpretations. Moreover, the graphical representation permits an illustration of

each inventory’s conceptual coverage of the Openness to Experience construct by depicting

where their items appear in relation to items of other inventories.

                                Psychometric Network Analysis

       Network analysis has become an increasingly popular approach to understand

psychopathology and personality phenomena. The network approach treats personality traits as

complex systems and items as interacting elements that form emergent properties such as facets

and traits (Costantini et al., 2015, 2017; Cramer et al., 2012; Mõttus & Allerhand, in press). In

our network, Openness to Experience items will be represented by nodes and their relationships

(i.e., correlations between two items) will be represented by edges. From the network

perspective, personality traits emerge from the relations that exist between variables (e.g., items;

Cramer et al., 2012). Thus, personality variables are not exchangeable—what you measure

matters. One item cannot be equally exchanged for another item because the content and
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     8


interpretation of each item is likely to mean different things. Thus, networks are what you put

into them.

       Consistent with this perspective, we suggest that Openness to Experience is measured

differently depending upon which inventory is being used. Moreover, we adopt the view that

personality items are valuable and informative in their own right—that is, they are differentially

related to affective, behavioral, and cognitive outcomes (McCrae, 2015; Mõttus, 2016).

Therefore, exchanging a facet or item for another could alter the conceptualization of the

construct and its relations to other items, facets, and outcomes. In this way, the different items

and facets in each inventory introduce inconsistencies in how Openness to Experience is

conceptualized, and ultimately, these differences lead to variation in Openness to Experience’s

relationships with outcomes. For example, the Intellect aspect of the Big Five Aspects Scales

(BFAS) Openness to Experience inventory consistently shows moderately positive relations to

working memory (DeYoung et al., 2009; Kaufman et al., 2010). Meanwhile, working memory

has shown weak relations (both positive and negative) to the Ideas facet (associated with BFAS’s

Intellect aspect) of the NEO Openness to Experience inventory (DeYoung et al., 2009; Smeekens

et al., 2016). The network approach offers a way to clarify these conflicting findings by

identifying conceptual similarities and differences between these inventories.

                                Psychometric Network Filtering

       One key way our network approach differs from previous practices is the way in which

we filter the network. Network filtering is an important part of network analysis because it

determines the connections and structure of the network. Filtering is necessary to remove

spurious connections in the network (i.e., multiple comparisons problem), obtain a parsimonious

model, and increase interpretability. In the psychological literature, the standard approach for
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     9


filtering networks has been the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso) approach

(Epskamp & Fried, 2018; van Borkulo et al., 2014).

       The lasso approach filters the network by penalizing the inverse covariance matrix, which

displays information about the partial correlations between two variables given all other

variables in the model (a value of zero between two variables signifies conditional

independence). The penalizing term, called the hyperparameter, is used in the Extended

Bayesian Information Criterion (EBIC; Chen & Chen, 2008), which is used to optimize model

selection (Epskamp, 2016; Foygel & Drton, 2010). This penalty parameter shrinks coefficients in

the inverse covariance matrix, with some going to zero, implying conditional independence (if

variables are related, then they are uniquely related, controlling all for other variables) and

creating a sparse model. Although the lasso approach is the current state-of-the-art, there are

some limitations (Christensen et al., 2018). The direct penalization to the inverse covariance

matrix, for example, isolates the unique covariation between variables but removes common

covariance that is typically considered in latent variable and factor analysis models (but see

Golino & Demetriou, 2017; Golino & Epskamp, 2017).

       Instead of the lasso approach, we used the Information Filtering Networks (IFN; Barfuss

et al., 2016; Christensen et al., 2018) approach, which applies a topological (structural) constraint

on zero-order correlations. More specifically, the Triangulated Maximally Filtered Graph

(TMFG; Massara et al., 2016) method of the IFN approach constrains the network to be planar

(i.e., edges can be drawn so that no edges cross one another) and retains 3n – 6 edges (where n

equals number of variables), which induces parsimony. In addition, the TMFG network embeds

conditional independence within its structure (i.e., the inverse covariance matrix can be

associated with the network structure; Barfuss et al., 2016), using zero-order correlations rather
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   10


than penalizing the inverse covariance matrix directly (Christensen et al., 2018). Thus, despite

implying conditional independence, the zero-order correlations retain the common covariance

between variables, making it feasible to detect hierarchical information while also reducing

measurement error (Forbes et al., 2017).

       Another advantage of the TMFG method is that it naturally develops a hierarchy in its

construction. This is achieved by building the network from the bottom-up: The algorithm begins

by connecting four nodes (i.e., items) together, which have the highest sum of correlations to all

other nodes, forming a tetrahedron. Then, the algorithm iteratively identifies and adds a node that

maximizes the sum of its connections to three of the nodes already included in the network. In

this process, a nested hierarchy develops such that the smallest components of the network

(cliques or sets of connected nodes) are the building blocks of larger components (communities

or clusters of cliques), which constitute the network (Song et al., 2011; 2012). Thus, there is an

intrinsic hierarchy that is formed from the local connections (between items) to the global

structure (the network itself). This feature of the TMFG method is particularly useful for

examining personality constructs (Christensen et al., 2018). In short, the TMFG method is a good

approach for determining the taxonomic structure of personality traits such as Openness to

Experience.

              Identifying the Hierarchical Structure of Openness to Experience

       There are several methods that can identify hierarchical structure in networks. Perhaps

the most common method is community detection, which identifies how many communities the

network can be broken into (for a review, see Fortunato, 2010). In our case, the network’s

communities are conceptually equivalent to facets; larger collections of communities, in turn, are

equivalent to aspects (e.g., Experiencing and Intellect; Epskamp, Rhemtulla, & Borsboom, 2016;
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                 11


Golino & Epskamp, 2017). The current state-of-the-art in psychometric networks is Exploratory

Graph Analysis (EGA; Golino & Epskamp, 2017) via the walktrap algorithm (Pons & Latapy,

2006). The walktrap algorithm uses random walks—random searches through the network

starting from each node across edges to other nodes—to detect community boundaries, which are

defined by many, densely connected surrounding edges and few, sparsely connected remote

edges.

         There are distinct advantages of using the TMFG method combined with the walktrap

algorithm over a more traditional approach like exploratory factor analysis (EFA). First, because

the TMFG method inherently builds a hierarchical structure, the relations between the items form

an emergent facet and factor structure from the data, without the direction of the researcher.

Conversely, EFA (e.g., principal axis factoring) attempts to maximize the covariance of the first

factor, followed by the second factor and so on, which potentially makes EFA less than ideal for

determining lower-order structures (such as facets). Second, the selection of the number and

content of communities (or facets) is relatively deterministic compared to EFA. The researcher

does not have to decide—using scree plots, eigenvalues, or component loadings—on how to best

categorize the data; instead, the walktrap algorithm determines the size and number of

communities based on the structure and connections of the network. Despite the relatively

deterministic approach, researchers should still be thorough and inspect the content of the output

to ensure that the results fit with theoretical expectations.

                                          Present Research

         The present research aimed to characterize Openness to Experience’s lower-order facet

structure via the application of network analysis. This was achieved by applying a network

approach to the items of four Openness to Experience inventories—BFAS (DeYoung et al.,
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    12


2007), HEXACO-100 (Ashton & Lee, 2004; Lee & Ashton, in press), NEO-PI-3 (McCrae,

Costa, & Martin, 2005), and Woo et al.’s (2014) Openness to Experience inventory. The goals of

this network construction were twofold. First, we sought to identify facets of Openness to

Experience using items from four different inventories (see Table 1). Second, we wanted to

examine the network to determine the conceptual coverage of the four inventories.

       Notably, our analyses were exploratory, so any a priori hypotheses on the nature and

number of facets would be speculative. Based on previous theoretical and empirical findings

discussed above, however, we expected to find two larger components (i.e., collections of

communities) that could be easily identified as the Experiencing and Intellect aspects.

Additionally, we expected several inventory-defined facets to appear (e.g., aestheticism,

intellectualism, fantasy), but the degree to which new facets would emerge or the number of

facets that would be consistent with previous facet definitions was left as an open question.

                                             Method

Participants

       There were three samples used for this study. The first sample was collected during the

Fall semester of 2015 at a university through the university’s psychology research pool. The total

sample included 210 participants (58.5% Caucasian, 33.5% African American) who were

primarily young adults (Mage = 18.95, SDage = 3.04, 76.1% female, 23.3% male).

       The second sample was collected during the Spring semester of 2017 at a university. A

total of 140 participants (54.6% Caucasian, 31.5% African American) were recruited using the

university’s psychology research pool and via responding to a flyer recruiting arts majors for

psychology research. This sample, who was primarily young adults (Mage = 19.86, SDage = 3.70,

75.9% female), specifically oversampled students majoring in the arts (i.e., music, theatre, fine
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                  13


arts) to increase the sample’s population of creative domains. If students majoring in the arts

were not in a psychology course, then they were compensated $20 for their participation.

       The third sample recruited 605 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk),

who were compensated $1.75 for their time. This sample (82.4% Caucasian, 10.3% African

American, 9.4% Asian American) had a broader age range (18 to 80 years old) and a more equal

gender distribution than our college samples (Mage = 35.37, SDage = 11.22, 53.5% female, 45.7%

male) The study was visible only to people who were native English speakers, over 18 years old,

located in the United States, and had completed at least 100 MTurk human intelligence tasks

with an approval rating no lower than 80%.

       In total, 955 participants were recruited across the three samples—121 of these

participants, however, were removed for having elevated scores on items intended to capture

inattentive responding (see Maniaci & Rogge, 2014; McKibben & Silvia, 2016, 2017). Thirty-

two participants were also removed from the analyses because the network analysis required

complete cases. In summary, 802 participants were included in the data analysis.

       Lab participants completed a paper consent form while MTurk participants completed an

electronic version of the paper consent form via Qualtrics. Participants then completed

demographics and the various Openness to Experience inventories. Items were randomized

within inventories, and the inventory order was randomized. Psychology participants were

compensated with research credits and the students majoring in the arts and MTurk participants

were compensated with money. All studies were approved by the university’s Institutional

Review Board.

Materials

       Openness to experience. People completed four different measures of Openness to
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    14


Experience: HEXACO-100, BFAS, NEO-PI-3, and Woo et al.’s Openness to Experience

Inventory. All responses were on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5

(Strongly Agree). Responses were reverse coded where applicable to provide a positive manifold.

         The HEXACO-100 personality inventory’s scale of Openness to Experience has four

facets—aesthetic appreciation, inquisitiveness, creativity, and unconventionality—with four

items per facet (16 items total; Lee & Ashton, 2004, in press).

         The BFAS (DeYoung et al., 2007) splits personality traits into two aspects: Openness

(i.e., Experiencing), reflecting perceptual and aesthetic engagement (10 items), and Intellect,

reflecting engagement in intellectual interests (10 items).

         The NEO-PI-3 (McCrae, Costa, & Martin, 2005) Openness to Experience inventory has

eight items per facet—ideas, values, fantasy, action, depth, and aesthetics—for a total of 48

items.

         Finally, Woo et al.’s (2014) Openness to Experience Inventory contains six facets:

aesthetics, curiosity, depth, intellectual efficiency, and tolerance (9 items per facet). Overall, the

Openness to Experience inventory has 54 items and the two aspects—Culture (i.e.,

Experiencing) and Creative Intellect (i.e., Intellect)—have 27 items each.

Network Construction

         Network filtering. In this network, the nodes represent the individual items from the

four Openness to Experience inventories and the edges are zero-order Pearson’s correlations

between items. Pearson’s correlations were used to produce a correlation matrix that is most

typical of what researchers use when conducting an EFA or confirmatory factor analysis (but see

Epskamp & Fried, 2018 for further discussion of non-normal and ordinal data in network

analysis). The TMFG method (Massara et al., 2016) was applied to construct a sub-network—a
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   15


smaller network within the full network—that captures the most relevant information between

nodes that are embedded in the original network and minimizes spurious associations. The

resulting sub-network is composed of 3- and 4-node cliques—a set of connected nodes (e.g., a

triangle and tetrahedron, respectively)—and it retains a total of 3n – 6 edges from the original

network (i.e., 408 edges).

        The TMFG method begins by sorting all edge weights (i.e., the zero-order correlations) in

descending order and adds the largest edge weight one by one, based on an iterative construction

process of a topologically constrained network (i.e., planar—a network that can be drawn on a

sphere without connections crossing each other). In this construction, the algorithm adds a node

into 3-cliques, based on a “T2 move” (Massara et al., 2016). The T2 move inserts a node into any

3-clique’s center where edges are added to it, forming a tetrahedron and keeping the network

planar. When adding these nodes, the algorithm optimizes an objective function that ensures the

added node has the maximum increase in the sum of the additional edge weights (see SI 1 and

Massara et al., 2016 for more technical details). The TMFG-filtered association matrix was

constructed using the NetworkToolbox package1 (Christensen, 2018) in R (R Core Team, 2017).

Network Analysis

        Community detection. After the TMFG method filtered the network, the walktrap

algorithm via the igraph package (Csardi & Nepusz, 2006) in R was applied to the network to

determine the size (i.e., number of items) and number of communities (i.e., facets). The walktrap

algorithm begins with a random search from each node to surrounding nodes to satisfy a

proportion of high internal edges to surrounding nodes (many, dense connections to surrounding

nodes) compared to the proportion of edges between the node and more distant nodes (few,


1
 The most up-to-date version of the NetworkToolbox package can be retrieved from
https://github.com/AlexChristensen/NetworkToolbox
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                  16


distant connections to more remote nodes). The proportions provide a measure of similarity

between each node and their surrounding nodes, which is then used to identify community

membership. The approach is based on the concept that a node’s random walks will get

“trapped” inside of the densely-connected communities the node belongs to (Pons & Latapy,

2006). Because the algorithm uses random walks, we verified that the results were consistent by

setting 10 random seeds in R, which controls the state of R’s random number generator. The

community results did not change based on the random seeds.

       Network visualization. The TMFG-filtered network was visualized using the qgraph

package (Epskamp et al., 2012) in R. Notably, the depiction of the networks appears to

contradict the property of planarity (a network that can be drawn on a sphere without

connections crossing each other). Although depicted with edges crossing, planarity simply means

that the network could be depicted in such a way that no edges cross. When drawn in this

fashion, however, the figure appears unnecessarily large.

       In addition, the distance between the nodes is related to. but not synonymous with, actual

conceptual distance or strength of relation (Forbes et al., 2017). The layout is based on the

Fruchterman and Reingold (1991) algorithm, which has been noted for its stochastic placement

process (e.g., a different ordering of variables can dramatically alter the network’s visualization).

Thus, caution must be taken when interpreting node proximities in the network. Finally, using

the communities extracted from the walktrap algorithm, we added labels and colors to each

network’s visualization.

       Core items of openness to experience. To determine facet (i.e., community) labels and

descriptions, items that were the most central to the Openness to Experience network were

identified using a hybrid centrality measure. Centrality measures are network measures that
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    17


evaluate a node’s influence, based on position and connections, in the network. The hybrid

centrality measure ranks nodes based on their values across multiple measures of centrality and

allows for a singular, continuous measure of overall centrality (Christensen et al., 2018; Pozzi et

al., 2013).

        Nodes with high hybrid centrality values are more central in the network; nodes with low

hybrid centrality values are more peripheral. Nodes were sorted in descending order of their

hybrid centrality values. The top 46 nodes (one third of the nodes) were designated as core, the

next 46 as intermediate, and the last 46 as peripheral. These breaks give an even distribution of

item classification and have been shown to provide meaningful distinctions for relevant

behavioral outcomes for other scales (Christensen et al., 2018). The hybrid centrality measure

was computed using the NetworkToolbox package in R.

Statistical Analyses

        Facet reliability. Rasch reliability (Rr), the empirical estimate of marginal reliability, for

each inventory-defined and network-identified facet were calculated using Winsteps (Linacre,

2017). We used the Rasch rating scale model, which is a polytomous model for data with more

                                                                       ∑(𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟)2 / 𝑁
than 2 categories (such as a Likert scale). Rr was calculated by 1 − 𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑂𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑑 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠 ,

and has equivalent interpretations to Cronbach’s alpha (Cronbach, 1951). In this formula, the

mean of the measure standard error (the numerator) is the model’s variance divided by the

variance of the observed data, which is then subtracted by 1. Typically, a Rr is a more

conservative measure (i.e., underestimation) of a scale’s reliability than Cronbach’s alpha

because it represents the true lower-bound of reliability (Eckes, 2011).

        Facet correlations. Prior to correlating the network-identified facets, the items for each

network-identified facet were summed and averaged to provide a facet score for each person.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                 18


Pearson’s correlations were calculated for the network-identified facets and a global Openness to

Experience variable (the average score of all Openness to Experience items). High correlations

with the global Openness to Experience variable would suggest that those network-identified

facets are more central to the global trait.

        R code and data sharing. All R code to reproduce the analyses are included in the

supplementary materials (SI 8). All data, cleaning procedures, analytic methods, and study

materials are available on the Open Science Framework for reproduction and replication

purposes: osf.io/954a7/.

                                               Results

Communities of the Openness to Experience Network

        The walktrap community detection algorithm identified 10 distinct communities (Figure

1), ranging from 7 to 25 items. Through visual inspection, these communities appeared to form

two larger components (aspects). Inspection of the identified facets (i.e., communities), however,

revealed three distinct aspects: Intellect (communities 1 – 3), Open-Mindedness (communities 4

– 6), and Experiencing (7 – 10). The descriptions of each community’s core items and item

composition were used to determine the labels and descriptions for each facet (Table 2). Note

that the communities listed below are based on the visual orientation and organization of

component relations, not necessarily the actual order that the walktrap algorithm produced.

        Community 1. The first community (turquoise in Figure 1) was relatively central in the

depiction of the network and included 17 items. The core items of this community reflected

interests in discussing philosophy (e.g., “I avoid philosophical discussions”; reversed) and

abstract ideas (e.g., “I have never really been interested in science”; reversed). This community

was also the most central to the Intellect component. Thus, this community was labeled
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     19


“Intellectual Interests.”

        Community 2. Extending to the bottom-right of the Intellectual Interests community was

a slightly larger community (20 items) related to perceived intellectual ability (violet in Figure

1). Core items in this community denoted quick thinking, fast processing, and an ability to

understand difficult ideas. All items in this community emphasize, in one way or another, the

person’s own assessment of their intellectual ability. This self-report of perceived intellectual

ability aligns with notions of subjectively assessed intelligence and self-estimates of intelligence

(Chamorro-Premuzic & Furnham, 2004). Therefore, this community was identified as “Self-

Assessed Intelligence.”

        Community 3. The last community of the Intellect component was located to the right of

the Intellectual Interests community (sea green in Figure 1) and contained 14 items. This

community was characterized by items related to reflection (e.g., “I love to reflect on things”),

interests in solving complex problems (e.g., “I like to solve complex problems”), and learning

new things (e.g., “I try to learn something new every day”). Based on these descriptions, we

labelled the community, “Intellectual Curiosity.”

        Community 4. The first community of the Open-Mindedness component branched to the

left of the Intellectual Interests community (sky blue in Figure 1). The core items of this

community described an openness towards beliefs, values, and culture that are different from

one’s own (e.g., “I think it is rude when others speak in a language I can’t understand”;

reversed). Overall, the 12 items of this community indicated a general sense of liberalism

towards others and opinions, and thus the community was labeled “Non-Traditionalism.”

        Community 5. Community 5 extended towards the bottom of the network from the Non-

Traditionalism community (pink in Figure 1). This community had 7 items which were all
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                      20


reverse coded. This community was slightly harder to define because no items were positively

endorsed for people high in the trait. We settled on “Variety-Seeking” to be consistent with

Connelly et al.’s (2014b) findings and because it summarized the opposite characteristics of the

items’ content in community, which centered on conventional, orthodox, and routine behavioral

characteristics. Notably, the facet label is the reverse of the items’ content; therefore, items in

this facet should also be reversed (as they were in the original inventories). Nonetheless,

reversing the items does not ensure that the indicators are the equivalent of their reverse content

(van Sonderen et al., 2013). In addition, this facet may be an artifact of reverse wording rather

than evidence for a meaningfully separable facet. Thus, careful consideration is necessary when

interpreting this facet.

        Community 6. Community 6 was to the left of the Non-Traditionalism community

(orange in Figure 1). This 12-item community was largely related to variety-seeking in

environments (e.g., “I enjoy a diverse community”), beliefs (e.g., “I learn a great deal from

people with differing beliefs”), and experiences of life (e.g., “I understand that people can have

different attitudes toward certain things than I do”). Items that were most central to this

community chiefly reflected preference for variety in cultural experiences; thus, we labeled this

community “Diversity.”

        Community 7. The seventh community was the largest, containing 25 items and was

located above the Intellectual Interests community (coral in Figure 1). This community was

clearly represented by aesthetic interests and appreciation with core items such as, “I have a

passion for art” and “I enjoy the beauty of nature,” and thus was labeled, “Aesthetic

Appreciation.” Not surprisingly, this community was most centrally located in the Experiencing

component.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                 21


       Community 8. The next community included 10 items and branched to the left of the

Aesthetic Appreciation community (slate blue in Figure 1). This community was defined by

immersion in emotions and music, with a single core item uniting these two descriptions, “I have

been touched emotionally by a great musical performance.” Several studies have demonstrated

that people high in Openness to Experience, specifically the Experiencing aspect, are more likely

to experience complex and subtle emotions related to aesthetic experiences (including music)

than people low in Openness to Experience (Cotter, Silvia, & Fayn, in press; McCrae, 2007;

Silvia, Fayn, Nusbaum, & Beaty, 2015). For this reason, we labelled this component “Openness

to Emotions,” with an emphasis on emotions related to aesthetic experiences (Table 2).

       Community 9. Stemming to the right of the Aesthetic Appreciation community was a

community of 14 items defined by creativity and imagination (green in Figure 1). Core items

were related to having an active imagination and engagement in creativity. The flavor of this

community was more related to creativity in the arts, such as “I would enjoy creating a work of

art, such as a novel, a song, or a painting,” than the sciences. Moreover, the community included

some indicators of active daydreaming such as, “letting a fantasy or daydream develop.”

Therefore, this community was labeled, “Imaginative.”

       Community 10. The last Experiencing community branched off to the right of the

Imaginative community (7 items; olive in Figure 1). Unlike the active daydreaming indicators of

the Imaginative community, this community emphasized passive daydreaming like “difficulty

letting my mind wander (reversed).” Thus, this community was characterized by daydreaming

and mind wandering, so we called it “Fantasy.”

Reliabilities and Correlations

       Rasch Reliabilities. Rasch reliabilities are presented for each inventory-defined facet
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     22


(Table 1) and each network-identified facet discussed above (Table 3). In general, most

inventory-defined facets had acceptable reliability (Rr > .70), with the exception of HEXACO’s

Aesthetic Appreciation and Unconventionality. The network-identified facets were all

satisfactory (Rr’s from .75 to .92), which was somewhat expected because facets with a larger

number of items tended to have larger reliabilities.

       Network-identified facet correlations. There are a few network-identified facet

correlations that are worth noting (Table 3). First, other than the central Experiencing, Intellect,

and Open-Mindedness facets (Aesthetic Appreciation, Intellectual Interests, and Non-

Traditionalism, respectively), the Intellectual Curiosity and Imaginative facets had the highest

correlations with the global Openness to Experience variable. Their high correlations are

consistent with their more central positions in the network. Another interesting pattern is the

differential relations of the Imaginative and Fantasy facets to the other facets. For example, the

Imaginative facet has much larger correlations with the Intellectual Curiosity, Aesthetic

Appreciation, and Self-Assessed Intelligence facets than the Fantasy facet. This suggests that,

despite being related (r = .50), they are conceptually distinct from one another. Similarly, the

Diversity and Variety-Seeking facets have a relatively small correlation (r = .36) and have

divergent relations with the Experiencing aspect’s facets, despite having similar relations to Non-

Traditionalism (r = .50 and r = .53, respectively). Finally, the Variety-Seeking, Openness to

Emotions, and Fantasy facets had relatively small correlations (r’s < .60) with the global

Openness to Experience variable compared to the other facets, which might suggest they are

more appropriate as compound traits or peripheral facets of Openness to Experience (Connelly et

al., 2014b). In sum, each network-identified facet had distinct relations with other facets, which

suggests that they are separate but related.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                      23


Conceptual Coverage

       To examine the conceptual coverage of each Openness to Experience inventory, we

depicted the network with only the items of the inventory of interest highlighted (Figure 2; see SI

3 – 6 for individual inventories). The number of network-identified facets and the number of

items in those facets were used to determine how well (or poorly) each inventory covered each

network-identified facet and aspect of Openness to Experience.

       BFAS. The BFAS had items in 7 of the 10 network-identified facets (see Figure 2; SI 3).

The Openness aspect had 5 items in the Aesthetic Appreciation facet, 2 in the Fantasy facet, and

1 item in both the Openness to Emotions and Imaginative facets. The Intellect aspect was

primarily defined by the Self-Assessed Intelligence facet (8 items) with 1 item reflecting the

Intellectual Interests facet. Both the BFAS Openness and Intellect aspects had 1 item in the

Intellectual Curiosity facet. The BFAS inventory adequately covered the Experiencing aspect

(items in all four Experiencing-related facets) while the Intellect aspect was relatively

homogeneous (i.e., mainly Self-Assessed Intelligence). In summary, although the BFAS

inventory had sufficient coverage of the Experiencing aspect, it had narrow coverage of the

Intellect aspect and no coverage of the Open-Mindedness aspect.

       HEXACO. The HEXACO-100 inventory had the narrowest coverage of the Openness to

Experience network (items in only 4 of 10 facets; see Figure 2; SI 4). HEXACO’s

Inquisitiveness, Aesthetic Appreciation, and Creativity facets were relatively homogeneous: all

four items for each subscale were in the Intellectual Interests, Aesthetic Appreciation, and

Imaginative facets of the network, respectively. In contrast, its Unconventionality facet was

sparsely spread out in the network, with 2 items in the Intellectual Interests facet, 1 item in the

Diversity facet, and 1 item in the Imaginative facet. Overall, the HEXACO-100 inventory had
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   24


adequate coverage of the network-identified Experiencing and Intellect aspects but little

coverage of the Open-Mindedness aspect (1 item).

       NEO-PI-3. The NEO-PI-3 had items in every network-identified facet except for the

Self-Assessed Intelligence facet (see Figure 2; SI 5). The NEO-PI-3’s Feelings facet spanned

both the Openness to Emotions (6 items) and Non-Traditionalism (2 items) facets. The

inventory’s Aesthetics facet was primarily contained within the network’s Aesthetic

Appreciation facet (6 items), with its remaining two items in the Openness to Emotions facet.

The NEO-PI-3’s Actions facet was spread out in the network: most items fell within the

network’s Variety-Seeking facet (5 items) with its remaining items falling into the Diversity (2

items) and Intellectual Curiosity (1 item) facets. The inventory’s Values facet was also spread

across the network, with 4 items in the Non-Traditionalism facet, 3 items in the Diversity facet,

and 1 item in the Variety-Seeking facet. The Fantasy facet of NEO-PI-3 made up most of the

items in the network-identified Fantasy facet (5 of 7 items) and had some items in the

Imaginative (3 items) facet. Finally, NEO-PI-3’s Ideas facet was equally spread between the

Intellectual Interests (4 items) and Intellectual Curiosity (4 items) facets. In terms of the

coverage of the network-identified aspects, Experiencing and Open-Mindedness were evenly

covered (with some of NEO-PI-3’s facets being the primary measurement of a few of the

network-identified facets), while the Intellect aspect was adequately covered.

       Woo et al.’s Inventory. Like the NEO-PI-3, Woo et al.’s inventory had items in every

network-identified facet except one (Fantasy; see Figure 2; SI 6). Woo et al.’s Intellectual

Efficiency facet only appeared in the Self-Assessed Intelligence facet (all 9 items). Similarly, the

inventory’s Aesthetics facet had 8 of its 9 items in the Aesthetic Appreciation facet. The other

Aesthetics item was the inventory’s lone representative in the Openness to Emotions facet. The
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    25


Tolerance facet of Woo et al.’s inventory was spread across four facets: Diversity (5 items),

Non-Traditionalism (2 items), Variety-Seeking (1 item), and Intellectual Interests (1 item).

Likewise, Woo et al.’s Curiosity facet appeared in four facets: Intellectual Curiosity (4 items),

Non-Traditionalism (3 items), Diversity (1 item), and Intellectual Interests (1 item). The

Ingenuity facet’s items were mainly found in the Imaginative facet (5 items), and the remaining

items were in the Self-Assessed Intelligence (3 items) and Intellectual Curiosity (1 item) facets.

Finally, the Depth facet had the most diverse coverage in four facets that spanned the three

network-identified aspects: Intellectual Interests (4 items), Aesthetic Appreciation (2 items),

Intellectual Curiosity (2 items), and Non-Traditionalism (1 item). In summary, Woo et al.’s

Openness to Experience inventory had considerable coverage of all of the aspects.

                                            Discussion

       The present study investigated the taxonomic structure of Openness to Experience and

the conceptual coverage of four commonly used Openness to Experience inventories by applying

network analysis to all inventories’ items. Using the walktrap community detection algorithm,

we found 10 facets—Variety-Seeking, Aesthetic Appreciation, Intellectual Curiosity, Diversity,

Openness to Emotions, Fantasy, Imaginative, Self-Assessed Intelligence, Intellectual Interests,

and Non-Traditionalism—that formed three higher-order aspects: two commonly found in the

literature (Experiencing and Intellect) and one novel aspect (Open-Mindedness).

       The correlational patterns of the 10 network-identified facets suggest that each facet is

distinct and has dissociable relations, despite some having seemingly similar descriptions.

Moreover, network-identified facets that were closer to the center of the network had higher

correlations with a global Openness to Experience variable, suggesting that facets more central in

the network are defining features of Openness to Experience. Finally, based on the network
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   26


representation, we were able to determine the conceptual coverage of each inventory. These

findings provide researchers with a clearer picture of the construct that each inventory measures.

Researchers should take these results into consideration when evaluating how Openness to

Experience relates to affective, behavioral, and cognitive outcomes.

Taxonomic Structure of Openness to Experience

       The larger components of the network seemed to suggest that three aspects of Openness

to Experience might better define the global trait than two. We labeled this third aspect Open-

Mindedness because it was largely defined by a receptiveness towards others’ ideas, values,

beliefs, lifestyles, and culture. Notably, this aspect was almost entirely defined by items from the

two larger inventories (i.e., NEO-PI-3 and Woo et al.’s Openness to Experience Inventory),

which highlights that they may have a broader conceptualization of Openness to Experience than

the smaller inventories. In terms of Open-Mindedness’s position in the network, it was more

peripherally located than the other two aspects. This suggests that Open-Mindedness might be a

compound aspect with another trait (e.g., Agreeableness) rather than a pure Openness to

Experience aspect. Future research is necessary to replicate this finding and to investigate the

potential of Open-Mindedness as a compound aspect. Nonetheless, our results demonstrate that a

third aspect of Openness to Experience might exist and is currently captured by popular

inventories.

       Below the three aspects, the network-identified facets were consistent with many of the

previous categorizations provided by Connelly and colleagues (2014b). Many facets were

identical in their label and description (Connelly et al.’s in parentheses): Aesthetic Appreciation

(Aestheticism), Openness to Emotions (Openness to Emotions), Fantasy (Fantasy), Variety-

Seeking (Variety-Seeking), Diversity (Tolerance) and Non-Traditionalism (Nontraditional). This
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   27


intersection is unsurprising considering that several inventories included in Connelly et al.’s

theoretical sort were also used in the present study, yet it is notable given the very different

analytic approaches that these studies used.

       Some network-identified facets, like Intellectual Interests and Intellectual Curiosity, were

harder to relate to Connelly et al.’s (2014b) categories. For example, the Intellectual Interests and

Intellectual Curiosity facets appear to fall under their global Openness to Experience category,

which was defined by an openness to ideas, complexity, and curiosity. This interpretation seems

appropriate given that Intellectual Interests and Intellectual Curiosity had two of highest

correlations with our global Openness to Experience variable. Our Imaginative facet, however,

was much less clear and seemed to be a blend of their Innovation (is creative and inventive; likes

to come up with new ideas) and Fantasy (has an overactive imagination) facets. Connelly et al.

seemed to treat imagination and fantasy as synonymous in their description of their Fantasy

facet. Our correlational findings, however, suggest that the Imaginative and Fantasy facets have

different relations with other facets in the Openness to Experience network (e.g., Intellectual

Curiosity, Aesthetic Appreciation, and Self-Assessed Intelligence facets). Finally, there were a

few facets that did not overlap. For example, we found a Self-Assessed Intelligence facet while

they did not, and Connelly et al. found a few facets that we did not (e.g., Openness to Sensations,

Autonomy, and Thrill-Seeking). These differences are likely due to the different scales and

inventories that were investigated in each study rather than differences in analytical approaches.

       More importantly, the central facets—based on position and their correlations with the

global Openness to Experience variables—of our network (Intellectual Interests, Aesthetic

Appreciation, and Intellectual Curiosity) perfectly align with Connelly and colleagues’ (2014b)

description of global Openness to Experience: wanting to think and understand problems, having
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    28


artistic or scientific interests, being introspective and curious. Moreover, the most central Open-

Mindedness facet, Non-Traditionalism, fit with additional descriptors of Connelly et al.’s global

Openness to Experience category (liberal and independent minded).

       Interestingly, our most peripheral facets (Fantasy, Variety-Seeking, and Openness to

Emotions) aligned with Connelly et al.’s Openness to Experience trait compounds. This seems to

confirm their position as peripheral facets and that they are probably associated with other traits.

Finally, the Diversity and Self-Assessed Intelligence facets were neither central nor peripheral

but may also reflect trait compounds. Diversity, for instance, is likely related to Agreeableness

while Self-Assessed Intelligence is likely related to Conscientiousness and psychometric

intelligence (although the facet purely refers to self-reported intellectual ability; Chamorro-

Premuzic et al., 2004).

       In summary, our network largely reproduces Connelly and colleagues’ (2014b)

theoretical sort. These results are encouraging because the lower-order facet structure seems to

be appropriately measured when using all four inventories. In most research practices, however,

it’s not practical to administer all four inventories. Time constraints and the redundancy of

questions across inventories means that researchers should try to use inventories that are most

appropriate for the outcomes they are measuring.

Conceptual Coverage of Openness to Experience

       Woo et al.’s (2014) Openness to Experience inventory had the broadest coverage of

Openness to Experience. Notably, the inventory had the most items of the inventories considered

in this study. In terms of the Intellect, Experiencing, and Open-Mindedness aspects, Woo et al.’s

inventory appeared to be well balanced across all three. Our network revealed a notable

difference in the categorization of one inventory-defined facet: Tolerance. In the original scale
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   29


design, the Tolerance facet was part of Woo et al.’s Culture (Experiencing) aspect. In contrast,

our results reveal that the Tolerance facet strongly characterized the Open-Mindedness aspect.

Although this facet could be consistent with both factors, Connelly et al.’s (2014b) meta-analytic

correlations show that it’s more likely that it’s influenced by another trait (Agreeableness), which

means it might be best conceptualized as a compound trait. In general, Woo et al.’s Openness to

Experience inventory provides the most comprehensive coverage of the Openness to Experience

construct.

       The NEO-PI-3 also had a large number of items, many of which were in peripheral facets

and sparsely spread out in the network. There were a few facets that were primarily described by

the NEO-PI-3 compared to other inventories (Variety-Seeking, Openness to Emotions, and

Fantasy). These facets were also the most peripheral in the network and had the lowest

correlations with the global Openness to Experience variable. Thus, although there are many

items in the NEO-PI-3, it seems that nearly half of them cover fringe characteristics of Openness

to Experience. Indeed, these facets are likely to be considered compound traits (e.g., Variety-

Seeking with Extraversion, Openness to Emotions with Extraversion and Neuroticism, and

Fantasy with low Conscientiousness; Connelly et al., 2014b). In terms of the coverage of the

Experiencing, Intellect, and Open-Mindedness aspects, the inventory seemed to favor

Experiencing and Open-Mindedness, which is consistent with Connelly and colleagues’

suggestion (2014b) and Woo et al.’s (2014) factor analytic findings. Indeed, the Self-Assessed

Intelligence facet contained no NEO items, which should be considered when researchers are

evaluating the NEO-PI-3 with cognitive outcomes—that is, it’s less likely to be related to

cognitive outcomes compared to the other inventories.

       For the smaller inventories, the HEXACO-100 inventory measured fewer facets (4 facets)
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                  30


than the BFAS inventory (7 facets), suggesting that it covers a narrow spectrum of Openness to

Experience. The HEXACO inventory mainly measured the central facets of Openness to

Experience (Aesthetic Appreciation and Intellectual Interests). Interestingly, the

Unconventionality facet of the HEXACO inventory had items in 3 different network-identified

facets (Intellectual Interests, Diversity, and Imaginative), despite being composed of 4 items.

This could explain why the Unconventionality facet had the lowest reliability across all

Openness to Experience inventory-defined facets. In terms of aspect coverage, the HEXACO

inventory was evenly distributed between the Experiencing and Intellect but had only one item in

the Open-Mindedness aspect, suggesting limited coverage of the broader Openness to

Experience construct.

       Similarly, the items in the BFAS inventory were evenly distributed between the

Experiencing and Intellect aspects but did not have any items in the Open-Mindedness aspect.

Our network revealed that the BFAS’s Intellect aspect primarily covered the Self-Assessed

Intelligence facet, which had the lowest correlations (r’s from .15 to .44) with the Experiencing

aspect’s facets. This finding could explain why there tends to be only moderate correlations

between its Openness and Intellect aspects (r’s usually between .30 and .40). Thus, we expect

that the Experiencing and Intellect aspects in other inventories would have stronger relations.

Furthermore, our results could account for why the NEO-PI-3 inventory has relatively weak

(positive and negative) findings with working memory whereas the BFAS inventory finds

consistent moderately positive associations (DeYoung et al., 2009; Kaufman et al., 2010;

Smeekens et al., 2016). Because the NEO-PI-3 lacks coverage of the Self-Assessed Intelligence

facet and BFAS Intellect is mainly Self-Assessed Intelligence, it’s likely that relationships with

cognitive attributes will vary depending on which scale is used. In general, the BFAS covers
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   31


both the Experiencing and Intellect aspects but tends to favor the specific facets of Aesthetic

Appreciation and Self-Assessed Intelligence, respectively.

       In summary of the larger two inventories, researchers interested in measuring the most

comprehensive coverage of Openness to Experience should consider using Woo et al.’s

inventory. The NEO-PI-3, when contrasted to Woo et al.’s scale, appears to measure

conceptually distinct regions of the Openness to Experience construct. This contrast seems to

suggest that the Woo et al.’s inventory has the broadest coverage of the Openness to Experience

network is not simply because it has the most items (the NEO-PI-3 has only 6 fewer items) but

because it has a greater diversity of items that were also related to items in the other inventories

included in our study. The smaller inventories covered the Experiencing and Intellect aspects

adequately but neither covered the Open-Mindedness aspect. Moreover, the Intellect aspect of

the BFAS seemed to strongly favor the Self-Assessed Intelligence facet while the HEXACO

inventory only covered the Intellectual Interests facet. These findings suggest that researchers

should take consideration in which inventories they use because it could affect how Openness to

Experience relates to other outcomes.

Limitations

       Several possible limitations of this study warrant consideration. First, the data are suitable

for a wide range of analytic methods, such as exploratory factor analysis and clustering methods.

One important limitation is that no comparison was made between our network analysis and

more traditional methods, so it is unclear if our network approach would produce notably

different results than EFA or any other factor finding methods. Previous network analysis studies

have evaluated the lasso approach’s ability to uncover factor structure via EGA (Golino &

Demetriou, 2017; Golino & Epskamp, 2017). Golino and Epskamp (2017) demonstrate, in a
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   32


simulation study, that EGA performs at least as well as other factor finding approaches, such as

Parallel Analysis and the Minimum Average Partial procedure. Therefore, future work should

emulate their simulation studies to determine if the approach used in this study performs

comparable or favorably compared to other more traditional methods.

       Another important consideration is the detection and interpretation of communities.

While the walktrap algorithm deterministically decides on the number and size (i.e., number of

items) of the communities, the interpretation of the communities is ultimately up to the

researcher (similar to EFA). The Fantasy and Imaginative facets, for example, were determined

to be separable communities based on the algorithm, and we also interpreted these communities

as separable. From a theoretical standpoint, however, a researcher might instead interpret these

two communities as one facet. In addition, our aspects (Intellect, Experiencing, and Open-

mindedness) were our interpretation of how the communities were clustered and were not

derived from the algorithm at all. Therefore, researchers may ultimately disagree with our

conclusions.

       Another possible limitation is that different samples (college and MTurk participants)

were pooled together. Post-hoc MANOVAs and Box’s M test revealed some significant

differences in the means and covariances of the items (SI 7). Thus, although the diversity of

participants beyond young college adults strengthens the generalizability of the findings to the

larger population, there may be instances of differential item functioning that are obscured by

pooling the samples in the network approach, which may influence the relations between items.

Other network methods, such as the Fused Graphical Lasso (Costantini et al., 2017; Danaher et

al., 2014) or the Ising model (Marsman et al., 2017; van Borkulo et al., 2014), might be able to

extract such information. Future work, however, should examine the implications of pooling
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                                       33


different samples and the effects this has on the pooled versus individual samples’ network

structure.

         In addition, sample size is likely to have a large effect on the reliability and estimates of

parameters in the model (Epskamp, Borsboom, & Fried, 2017). In our study, for example, there

were 9,453 possible parameters and 408 parameters in the network model. This means that,

despite our sample of 802 people, there were just under 2 people per estimated parameter. Some

of this could be ameliorated by including missing data (e.g., Full Information Maximum

Likelihood), which was removed by our analyses. Even so, having a few more people would not

change the fact that only having a few people per parameter renders any attempts of cross-

validation, such as split-half sampling, unreliable. Moreover, this makes it relatively difficult to

estimate the reliability of the community structures. Future developments should try to overcome

the limitation of sample size by including missing data and harnessing bootstrapping (Epskamp

et al., 2017; Golino & Demetriou, 2017) or permutation (van Borkulo et al., 2018) techniques.

         In consideration of the sample size, some of the estimated relations between variables and

variables inclusion in one facet rather than another may be unreliable.2 In the Intellectual

Curiosity facet, for example, there is an item referring to “broad intellectual interests” that, in a

larger sample, might be more likely to belong to the Intellectual Interests facet. Other than

sample size, there could be other explanations for this result. One explanation could be that the

Intellectual Curiosity facet is not specifically measured by any inventory included in the study.

Therefore, if there were more items with content related to the Intellectual Curiosity facet, then

the item (and others) may align more with the Intellectual Interests facet. Notably, this limitation


2
 In general, the reliability of network estimates is a critical concern in the developing field of psychological
networks, and has stirred recent debate (see Borsboom et al., 2017; Forbes et al., 2017; Steinley et al., 2017). The
approach used in this study was not discussed in the debate; however, recent research has compared the approach
used in this study to the current state-of-the-art lasso (Christensen et al., 2018).
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    34


is not unique to this approach but also applies to EFA component loadings and clustering

analysis. Thus, like EFA, researchers should use considerable caution when applying these

methods and evaluate the results in light of theory and past research.

Where Do We Go From Here?

        Openness to Experience is a broad, complex trait that is difficult to pin down. As

demonstrated by the present research, prominent personality inventories, while generally

agreeing on the higher-order aspects of Experiencing and Intellect, inconsistently assess a variety

of fine-grained facets. The most immediate implication of the present research is that researchers

may not be measuring the Openness to Experience they believe they are measuring. Each

inventory examined here demonstrated differential coverage of the trait and its two aspects.

Moreover, we suggest a third aspect—Open-Mindedness—also exists in Openness to

Experience’s taxonomy and should be considered in the development of future Openness to

Experience inventories. Overall, this means that researchers should carefully consider their

outcome measures and select the inventory or inventories that best assess the facets that are of

greatest theoretical interest.

        Future work should broaden the network to include more inventories of Openness to

Experience to replicate our aspect and facet findings in the current network but also to determine

whether any additional aspects or facets should be included. With this consideration, networks

reflect of their inputs—that is, the network is constrained by what the researcher puts into it. Our

network, for example, is limited to the elements within these inventories, and may not reflect all

possible facets. Indeed, subject matter experts may disagree with some of the facets (e.g., Self-

Assessed Intelligence), while others may disagree with how the content aligns within each facet

(e.g., Intellectual Curiosity and Intellectual Interests). Adding additional inventories will
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   35


ultimately alter the structure of the network but may clarify, add, or reduce the number of facets

identified in this study. Additional work that moves beyond pre-existing inventories may also aid

in the formation of new developments and conceptualizations (DeYoung et al., 2012). For

example, including outcome measures in the network—such as apophenia and intelligence, as

DeYoung and colleagues (2012) have suggested—may further clarify the structure of lower-

order facets. Costantini and Perugini (2016) have already embraced this approach by

constructing a network of Conscientiousness and related outcome variables. Although they used

only self-report measures, their findings have enhanced the understanding of the

Conscientiousness trait continuum.

       Another avenue would be to broaden the content of the items within the facets that are at

the core of Openness to Experience (e.g., Intellectual Interest, Aesthetic Appreciation, Non-

Traditionalism, Imaginative, and Intellectual Curiosity). In an inspection of the Intellectual

Interests facet, for instance, there is a large redundancy of items related to philosophy. It’s

obvious that Intellectual Interests should be much broader than philosophical interests and that

the inventories investigated in this study severely limit the breadth of this facet. Mussel (2013),

for instance, has already taken a step in this direction by developing a lower-order framework of

BFAS’s Intellect that broke into a 2-dimensional structure (Seek and Conquer) with 3 operations

(Think, Learn, and Create). Mussel’s framework develops a finer-grained view that provides

meaningful differentiations within one aspect of Openness to Experience.

       This approach echoes McCrae (2015), who suggests researchers should try to increase the

breadth of facets rather than scale reliability. HEXACO’s Unconventionality facet may be the

best example of this perspective. Although its reliability was relatively poor, it covered three

different network-identified facets within the Openness to Experience network. Taking this idea
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    36


one step further, facets could be inventories in their own right. For example, the Imaginative

facet could easily be a full-fledged inventory for the investigation of imagination. Another step

in this direction would be to evaluate facets (rather than traits) with outcome variables, and

remove items that have implied relations to the outcome within the item’s description (e.g., “I

believe in the importance of art” in relation to the outcome of drawing as a hobby; Mõttus,

2016). In this way, facets could be further refined by their relations to outcomes rather than their

internal consistency.

Conclusion

       In summary, our study builds on previous work that examined the lower-order facet

structure of Openness to Experience by constructing a network from items in four commonly

used Openness to Experience inventories. Our results were in line with previous theoretical

investigations of the lower-order facet structure of Openness to Experience. In addition, our

network model suggests that an additional aspect of Open-Mindedness should be considered. We

also show that each inventory covers different conceptual space of the Openness to Experience

construct, with some covering narrow regions and others covering most of it. The choice of

inventory will thus influence how Openness to Experience relates to outcome variables. The

present findings can aid researchers seeking to select items and inventories, and to refine and

develop additional assessment tools for Openness to Experience, a complex and intriguing trait.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                               37


                                           References

Barford, K. A., & Smillie, L. D. (2016). Openness and other Big Five traits in relation to

       dispositional mixed emotions. Personality and Individual Differences, 102, 118-122.

Barfuss, W., Massara, G. P., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2016). Parsimonious modeling with

       information filtering networks. Physical Review E, 94(6), 062306.

Chamorro‐Premuzic, T., & Furnham, A. (2004). A possible model for understanding the

       personality‐intelligence interface. British Journal of Psychology, 95(2), 249-264.

Christensen, A. P. (2018). NetworkToolbox: Methods and measures for brain, cognitive, and

       psychometric network analysis. R package version 1.0.0. Available from

       https://github.com/AlexChristensen/NetworkToolbox

Christensen, A. P., Kenett, Y. N., Aste, T., Silvia, P. J., & Kwapil, T. R. (2018). Network

       structure of the Wisconsin Schizotypy Scales-Short Forms: Examining psychometric

       filtering approaches. Behavior Research Methods. doi: 10.3758/s13428-018-1032-9

Chen, J., & Chen, Z. (2008). Extended Bayesian information criteria for model selection with

       large model spaces. Biometrika, 95(3), 759-771.

Connelly, B. S., Ones, D. S., & Chernyshenko, O. S. (2014a). Introducing the special section on

       openness to experience: Review of openness taxonomies, measurement, and nomological

       net. Journal of Personality Assessment, 96(1), 1-16.

Connelly, B. S., Ones, D. S., Davies, S. E., & Birkland, A. (2014b). Opening up openness: A

       theoretical sort following critical incidents methodology and a meta-analytic

       investigation of the trait family measures. Journal of Personality Assessment, 96, 17-28.

Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Four ways five factors are basic. Personality and

       Individual Differences, 13(6), 653-665.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                     38


Costantini, G., Epskamp, S., Borsboom, D., Perugini, M., Mõttus, R., Waldorp, L. J., & Cramer,

       A. O. J. (2015). State of the aRt personality research: A tutorial on network analysis of

       personality data in R. Journal of Research in Personality, 54, 13-29.

Costantini, G., & Perugini, M. (2016). The network of conscientiousness. Journal of Research in

       Personality, 65, 68-88.

Costantini, G., Richetin, J., Preti, E., Casini, E., Epskamp, S., & Perugini, M. (2017). Stability

       and variability of personality networks: A tutorial on recent developments in network

       psychometrics. Personality and Individual Differences.

Cotter, K. N., Silvia, P. J., & Fayn, K. (in press). What does feeling like crying when listening to

       music feel like? Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts.

Cramer, A. O., Sluis, S., Noordhof, A., Wichers, M., Geschwind, N., Aggen, S. H., ... &

       Borsboom, D. (2012). Dimensions of normal personality as networks in search of

       equilibrium: You can’t like parties if you don’t like people. European Journal of

       Personality, 26(4), 414-431.

Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika,

       16(3), 297-334.

Csardi, G., & Nepusz, T. (2006). The igraph software package for complex network research.

       InterJournal, Complex Systems, 1695(5), 1-9.

DeYoung, C. G., Grazioplene, R. G., & Peterson, J. B. (2012). From madness to genius: The

       Openness/Intellect trait domain as a paradoxical simplex. Journal of Research in

       Personality, 46(1), 63-78.

DeYoung, C. G., Shamosh, N. A., Green, A. E., Braver, T. S., & Gray, J. R. (2009). Intellect as

       distinct from openness: Differences revealed by fMRI of working memory. Journal of
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                39


       Personality and Social Psychology, 97(5), 883-892.

DeYoung, C. G., Quilty, L. C., & Peterson, J. B. (2007). Between facets and domains: 10 aspects

       of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93(5), 880-896.

DeYoung, C. G., Quilty, L. C., Peterson, J. B., & Gray, J. R. (2014). Openness to experience,

       intellect, and cognitive ability. Journal of Personality Assessment, 96(1), 46-52.

Eckes, T. (2011). Introduction to many-facet Rasch measurement: Analyzing and evaluating

       rater-mediated assessments. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang.

Epskamp S. 2016 Regularized Gaussian psychological networks: Brief report on the performance

       of extended BIC model selection. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1606.05771.

Epskamp, S., Borsboom, D., & Fried, E. I. (2017). Estimating psychological networks and their

       accuracy: A tutorial paper. Behavior Research Methods, 1-18.

Epskamp, S., Cramer, A. O., Waldorp, L. J., Schmittmann, V. D., & Borsboom, D. (2012).

       qgraph: Network visualizations of relationships in psychometric data. Journal of

       Statistical Software, 48(4), 1-18.

Epskamp, S., & Fried, E. I. (2018). A tutorial on regularized partial correlation networks.

       Psychological Methods.

Epskamp, S., Rhemtulla, M., & Borsboom, D. (2017). Generalized network psychometrics:

       Combining network and latent variable models. Psychometrika, 1-24. doi:

       10.1007/s11336-017-9557-x

Fiske, D.W. (1949). Consistency of the factorial structures of personality ratings from different

       sources. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44, 329–344.

Forbes, M. K., Wright, A. G. C., Markon, K. E., & Krueger, R. F. (2017). Evidence that

       psychopathology symptom networks have limited replicability. Journal of Abnormal
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   40


       Psychology, 126(7), 969-988.

Fortunato, S. (2010). Community detection in graphs. Physics Reports, 486(3), 75-174.

Foygel, R., & Drton, M. (2010). Extended Bayesian information criteria for Gaussian graphical

       models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2020–2028.

Fruchterman, T. M., & Reingold, E. M. (1991). Graph drawing by force‐directed placement.

       Software: Practice and Experience, 21(11), 1129-1164.

Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and individual differences: The search for universals in

       personality lexicons. Review of Personality and Social Psychology, 2(1), 141-165.

Golino, H. F., & Demetriou, A. (2017). Estimating the dimensionality of intelligence like data

       using Exploratory Graph Analysis. Intelligence, 62, 54-70.

Golino, H. F., & Epskamp, S. (2017). Exploratory graph analysis: A new approach for estimating

       the number of dimensions in psychological research. PloS one, 12(6), e0174035.

Johnson, J. A. (1994). Clarification of factor five with the help of the AB5C model. European

       Journal of Personality, 8(4), 311–34.

Kaufman, S. B., DeYoung, C. G., Gray, J. R., Jiménez, L., Brown, J., & Mackintosh, N. (2010).

       Implicit learning as an ability. Cognition, 116(3), 321-340.

Kaufman, S. B., Quilty, L. C., Grazioplene, R. G., Hirsh, J. B., Gray, J. R., Peterson, J. B., &

       DeYoung, C. G. (2016). Openness to experience and intellect differentially predict

       creative achievement in the arts and sciences. Journal of Personality, 84(2), 248-258.

Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2004). Psychometric properties of the HEXACO personality

       inventory. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 39(2), 329-358.

Lee, K., & Ashton, M. (in press). Psychometric properties of the HEXACO-100. Assessment.

Linacre, J.M. (2017). Winsteps® (Version 3.93.0) [Computer Software]. Beaverton, Oregon:
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                  41


       Winsteps.com. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Available from http://www.winsteps.com/

Maniaci, M. R., & Rogge, R. D. (2014). Caring about carelessness: Participant inattention and its

       effects on research. Journal of Research in Personality, 48, 61-83.

Massara, G. P., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2016). Network filtering for big data: Triangulated

       maximally filtered graph. Journal of Complex Networks, 5(2), 161-178.

McCrae, R. R. (2007). Aesthetic chills as a universal marker of openness to experience.

       Motivation and Emotion, 31(1), 5-11.

McCrae, R. R. (2015). A more nuanced view of reliability: Specificity in the trait

       hierarchy. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 19(2), 97-112.

McCrae, R. R., Costa, Jr, P. T., & Martin, T. A. (2005). The NEO–PI–3: A more readable

       revised NEO personality inventory. Journal of Personality Assessment, 84(3), 261-270.

McKibben, W. B., & Silvia, P. J. (2016). Inattentive and socially desirable responding:

       Addressing subtle threats to validity in quantitative counseling research. Counseling

       Outcome Research and Evaluation, 7, 53-64.

McKibben, W. B., & Silvia, P. J. (2017). Evaluating the distorting effects of inattentive

       responding and social desirability on self-report scales in creativity and the arts. Journal

       of Creative Behavior, 51, 57-69.

Mõttus, R. (2016). Towards more rigorous personality trait–outcome research. European Journal

       of Personality, 30(4), 292-303.

Mõttus, R., & Allerhand, M. (in press). Why do traits come together? The underlying trait and

       network approaches. In V. Zeigler-Hill & T. K. Shackelford (Eds.), SAGE handbook of

       personality and individual differences: The science of personality and individual

       differences (Vol. 1, pp. 1-22). London, UK: SAGE.
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                    42


Mussel, P. (2013). Intellect: A theoretical framework for personality traits related to intellectual

       achievements. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(5), 885-906.

Norman, W. T. (1963). Toward an adequate taxonomy of personality attributes: Replicated factor

       structure in peer nomination personality ratings. Journal of Abnormal and Social

       Psychology, 66, 574–583.

Pons, P., & Latapy, M. (2006). Computing communities in large networks using random

       walks. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 10(2), 191-218.

Pozzi, F., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2013). Spread of risk across financial markets: Better to

       invest in the peripheries. Scientific Reports, 3(1665), 1-7.

R Core Team (2017). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for

       Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. Available from https://www.R-project.org/.

Silvia, P. J., Cotter, K. N., & Chrisensen, A. P. (2017). The creative self in context: Experience

       sampling and the ecology of everyday creativity. In M. Karwowski & J. C. Kaufman

       (Eds.), The creative self: Effects of beliefs, self-efficacy, mindset, and identity (pp. 275 –

       288). Cambridge, MA: Elsevier.

Silvia, P. J., Fayn, K., Nusbaum, E. C., & Beaty, R. E. (2015). Openness to experience and awe

       in response to nature and music: Personality and profound aesthetic experiences.

       Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 9, 376-384.

Smeekens, B. A., & Kane, M. J. (2016). Working memory capacity, mind wandering, and

       creative cognition: An individual-differences investigation into the benefits of controlled

       versus spontaneous thought. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 10(4),

       389-415.

Song, W. M., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2011). Nested hierarchies in planar graphs. Discrete
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                   43


       Applied Mathematics, 159(17), 2135-2146.

Song, W. M., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2012). Hierarchical information clustering by means of

       topologically embedded graphs. PLoS One, 7(3), e31929.

van Borkulo, C. D., Boschloo, L., Kossakowski, J., Tio, P., Schoevers, R. A., Borsboom, D., &

       Waldorp, L. J. (2018). Comparing network structures on three aspects: A permutation

       test. Manuscript under review. Available from:

       https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Claudia_Van_Borkulo/publication/314750838_Com

       paring_network_structures_on_three_aspects_A_permutation_test/links/58c55ef1458515

       38eb8af8a9/Comparing-network-structures-on-three-aspects-A-permutation-test.pdf

van Sonderen, E., Sanderman, R., & Coyne, J. C. (2013). Ineffectiveness of reverse wording of

       questionnaire items: Let’s learn from cows in the rain. PloS one, 8(7), e68967.

Woo, S. E., Chernyshenko, O. S., Longley, A., Zhang, Z. X., Chiu, C. Y., & Stark, S. E. (2014).

       Openness to experience: Its lower-level structure, measurement, and cross-cultural

       equivalence. Journal of Personality Assessment, 96(1), 29-45.

Xu, X., Plaks, J. E., & Peterson, J. B. (2016). From dispositions to goals to ideology: Toward a

       synthesis of personality and social psychological approaches to political

       orientation. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 10(5), 267-280.
               REOPENING NETWORK OF OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                                       44


           Table 1. Descriptions and Rasch reliabilities (Rr) of each facet from each Openness to Experience inventory.

            Scale                          Facet (Rr)                                                     Description
          NEO-PI-3                        Fantasy (.76)                                  Receptivity to the inner world of imagination
(Martin, McCrae, & Costa, 2005)          Aesthetics (.81)                                       Appreciation of art and beauty
                                          Feelings (.73)                                    Openness to inner feelings and emotions
                                           Actions (.71)                               Openness to new experiences on a practical level
                                           Ideas (.82)                                              Intellectual curiosity
                                           Values (.74)                    Readiness to re-examine one’s own values and those of authority figures
           BFAS                                                    Perceptual engagement (perceptual and sensory information), including an interest in art,
                                          Openness (.80)
     (DeYoung et al. 2007)                                                                    nature, and sensory experiences
                                                                     Intellectual engagement (abstract and semantic information), including an interest in
                                          Intellect (.83)
                                                                                 intellectual hobbies and activities as well as intellectual ability
            Woo                                                     Appreciation of various forms of art such as paintings, classical music, buildings, and
                                         Aesthetics (.84)
       (Woo et al., 2014)                                                                                  landscapes
                                           Depth (.77)              Desire to gain insights into oneself and the world, to self-improve, and to self-actualize
                                                                    Interest in learning about different cultures, preference to immerse self in new customs
                                          Tolerance (.69)
                                                                                                  and traditions when traveling
                                   Intellectual Efficiency (.83)                    Efficiency in processing novel intellectual information
                                          Ingenuity (.82)                             Preparedness to create new intellectual knowledge
                                         Curiosity (.77)                                     Attraction to novel intellectual ideas
          HEXACO                   Aesthetic Appreciation (.67)                             Enjoyment of beauty in art and in nature
     (Lee & Ashton, 2004)              Inquisitiveness (.73)        Tendency to seek information about, and experience with, the natural and human world
                                        Creativity (.73)                                Preference for innovation and experimentation
                                     Unconventionality (.58)                                   Tendency to accept the unusual
         REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                45


         Table 2. Labels and descriptions of the network-identified facets.

    Aspect                  Facet                                             Description
    Intellect        Intellectual Interests     Engagement in philosophy and discussing abstract, theoretical ideas
                        Self-Assessed             Perceived ability to think quickly, solve problems, and process
                          Intelligence                                        information
                                                 Enjoyment of learning new things, thinking about complexity, and
                     Intellectual Curiosity
                                                                         reflecting on thoughts
Open-Mindedness      Non-Traditionalism                Receptiveness to new ideas, cultures, and perspectives
                                               Willingness to explore new environments and try new ways of doing
                       Variety-Seeking
                                                                                  things
                          Diversity                    Embraces a variety of attitudes, beliefs, and lifestyles
  Experiencing      Aesthetic Appreciation               Engagement in the arts and perceptual experiences
                    Openness to Emotions       Sensitivity to aesthetic emotions, complex feelings, and strong moods
                         Imaginative                   Ability to have original thoughts and a desire to create
                           Fantasy                            Tendency to daydream and mind wander
REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                46


Table 3. Rasch reliabilities (Rr) and correlations of the network-identified Openness to

Experience facets.

 Network-identified Facet           Rr    1.    2.    3.    4.    5.    6.    7.    8.     9.   10.
 1. Intellectual Interests          .89   —
 2. Self-Assessed Intelligence      .90   .56   —
 3. Intellectual Curiosity          .88   .65   .61   —
 4. Non-Traditionalism              .80   .65   .44   .46   —
 5. Variety-Seeking                 .75   .39   .25   .23   .53   —
 6. Diversity                       .75   .43   .27   .56   .50   .36   —
 7. Aesthetic Appreciation          .92   .63   .35   .54   .50   .32   .48   —
 8. Openness to Emotions            .79   .30   .15   .45   .34   .12   .47   .54   —
 9. Imaginative                     .86   .54   .44   .61   .39   .30   .40   .68   .49    —
 10. Fantasy                      .75 .41 .27 .31 .54 .35 .27 .40 .36 .50 —
 Global Openness to Experience .97 .83 .66 .78 .73 .48 .63 .84 .57 .78 .57
Note. All p’s < .001. Bold numbers are within-aspect correlations (1–3, Intellect; 4–6, Open-

Mindedness; 7–10, Experiencing).
     REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                                             47


Figure 1. The network of Openness to Experience depicted with all items. The shape of the node indicates the inventory (square,
BFAS; diamond, HEXACO; circle, NEO; triangle, Woo et al.), the color portrays the network-identified facet, the label represents the
inventory-defined facet and the item number of the inventory-defined facet (see SI 2 for identification).
    REOPENING OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE                                                                                               48


Figure 2. The networks depict the item coverage based on the network-identified facets of each openness to experience inventory.

Colored nodes represent items in the respective inventory and network-identified facet while white nodes indicate items of other

inventories. For full view of each inventory see supplementary materials.
